**Abstract**  
  
Failure to adequately characterize cell lines, and understand the differences between in vitro and in vivo biology, can have serious consequences on the translatability of in vitro scientific studies to human clinical trials. This project focuses on the Michigan Cancer Foundation-7 (MCF-7) cells, a human breast adenocarcinoma cell line that is commonly used for in vitro cancer research, with over 42,000 publications in PubMed. In this study, we explore the key similarities and differences in gene expression networks of MCF-7 cell lines to human breast cancer tissues. We used two MCF-7 data sets, one data set collected by ARCHS4 including 1032 samples and one data set from Gene Expression Omnibus GSE50705 with 88 estrogen-treated MCF7 samples. The human breast cancer tissue data set came from The Cancer Genome Atlas, including 1212 breast tissue samples from individuals with breast invasive carcinoma. Weighted Gene Correlation Network Analysis (WGCNA) and functional annotations of the data showed that MCF7 cells and human breast tissues have only minimal similarity in biological processes, although some fundamental functions, such as cell cycle, are conserved. Scaled connectivity — a network topology metric — also showed drastic differences in the behavior of genes between MCF7 and BRCA. Finally, we used canSAR to compute ligand-based druggability scores of genes in the two data sets, and our results suggested that using MCF-7 as a model for breast cancer may lead to missing important gene targets. Since cancer cell lines are commonly used in both basic and translational research to understand biological mechanisms, drug effects, and toxicology pathways, our comparison of the regulatory networks of MCF-7 and breast cancer tissues can address some concerns over the validity of using cancer cell lines as standard models for humans.  
  
This study has been submitted to Frontiers in Artifical Intelligence in Febbruary, 2021.   
